Readme.md, before:

# Code Feature Extraction

## Introduction

This project aims to extract and compute source-code-related features from a C/C++ software repository. It analyzes the source code based on static and version control history aspects and creates a dependency graph containing the relationships between files/functions and their association weights. The ultimate goal of extracting these features is for sloving the  test case selection and prioritization problems.

## Instructions for Obtaining Understand Database
### Understand
Understand is a code analysis enterprise software which provides static dependencies available in a source code between files, functions, classes, etc. For more details on this software, visit [this link](https://scitools.com/features). In this project, we utilize Understand to create a static call graph as a base for other features. 

In this section, we explain how to obtain the Understand database, a file with `.und` format which is the output of Understand's analysis. Note that this project needs Understand's database for extracting features and won't work without it.

### Adding Understand Python Package/Library
Unlike typical projects, Understand doesn't provide its Python library in the well-known pip package installer, and you need to manually add the package to your Python environment. The instructions of adding the package are explained in [this link](https://scitools.com/support/python-api/).

### Creating Accurate C/C++ Understand Databases
Before moving forward to creating an Understand project, it's worth to pay attention to some points. On [this page](https://scitools.com/support/creating-accurate-cc-projects/), it is explained how to create accurate C/C++ Understand projects including a couple of solutions. Due to the common use of cmake in C/C++ projects and its simplicity, we recommend to follow the cmake solution explained in [this link](https://scitools.com//support/cmake-and-understand/). Using the method would omit all unnessary scripts and files that are not considered. In a nutshell, cmake's `CMAKE_EXPORT_COMPILE_COMMANDS` attribute should be set to `ON` so that cmake generates the `compile_commands.json` file which improves Understand's accuracy significantly.

### Creating Understand Database Using the GUI
The following instructions are for creating an Understand database using the `compile_commands.json` file generated by the cmake command in C/C++ projects. If this approach does not apply to your project, you can checkout Understand's official documents in [this link](https://scitools.com/support/) and find the best method for your project.

- Click on File -> New -> Project from the title bar.

- Add the root directory of your source code and click continue, like this:

![Add directory](docs/gui-wizard-1.png)

- Next, you can see the "Import Settings from Other Tools?" window which might include lots of options to select from (like the image below). If you have followed the last section, you can see the `compile_commands.json` among the options. Tap the Import button on the right side of this option.

![Import settings](docs/gui-wizard-2.png)

- In this step, you can set the path to save the database file after Understand's analysis. You can also view how many source files Understand has detected. Finally, click on Create Project and wait for the analysis to complete.

![Summary](docs/gui-wizard-3.png)

### Creating Understand Database Using the CLI
- TODO ([official docs](https://scitools.com/support/commandline))

## Usage Instructions
### Arguments
After creating Understand's database, you're ready to run our script. The following table demonstrates available arguments to run the script:

Argument Name | Description | Required
--- | --- | ---
-h, --help | Shows the help message and exits. | No
-d, --db-path | Path to Understand's database with the .udb format. | Yes
-p, --project-path | Path to project's source code which is a git repository. | Yes
-l, --level | Specifies the granularity of feature extraction. It can be one of the two "file" or "function" values. | Yes
-o, --ouput-dir | Specifies the directory to save resulting datasets. The directory would be created if it doesn't exist. | Yes
--branch | The git branch to analyze. The default value is "master". | No
--since | The start date of commits to analyze with the format of YYYY-MM-DD. Not providing this argument means to analyze all commits. | No

### Usage Examples
- This example analyzes ceph's nautilus branch in the file granularity level for only commits since 2020-04-16:
```
python main.py -p ../sample-projects/ceph -d ../sample-projects/ceph.udb -l file -o ./ceph-file --branch nautilus --since 2020-04-16
```
- This example analyzes ceph's master branch in the function granularity level for all available commits:
```
python main.py -p ../sample-projects/ceph -d ../sample-projects/ceph.udb -l function -o ./ceph-function
```

## Outputs
Currently, this project creates two .csv files as its final results which are `metadata.csv` and `dep_graph.csv`.

### Metadata File
The `metadata.csv` file represents the features available for each individual entity (file or function depending on the used granularity level).
In addition to the metrics provided by Understand's analysis, it includes id, unique name, and path columns. 
You can read the description of all Understand metrics in [this link](https://scitools.com/support/metrics_list).
Here's a sample of ceph's extracted metadata in the file granularity:

|Id|Name|FilePath|AltAvgLineBlank|AltAvgLineCode|AltAvgLineComment|AltCountLineBlank|AltCountLineCode|AltCountLineComment|AvgCyclomatic|AvgCyclomaticModified|AvgCyclomaticStrict|AvgEssential|AvgLine|AvgLineBlank|AvgLineCode|AvgLineComment|CountDeclClass|CountDeclFunction|CountLine|CountLineBlank|CountLineCode|CountLineCodeDecl|CountLineCodeExe|CountLineComment|CountLineInactive|CountLinePreprocessor|CountSemicolon|CountStmt|CountStmtDecl|CountStmtEmpty|CountStmtExe|MaxCyclomatic|MaxCyclomaticModified|MaxCyclomaticStrict|MaxEssential|MaxNesting|RatioCommentToCode|SumCyclomatic|SumCyclomaticModified|SumCyclomaticStrict|SumEssential|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|1|ClusterWatcher.cc|src/tools/cephfs_mirror/ClusterWatcher.cc|2|14|0|28|123|7|3|3|3|0|16|2|14|0|0|8|156|28|112|40|10|7|0|11|50|111|87|0|24|8|8|8|1|3|0.06|27|27|27|8|
|20|debug.h|src/common/debug.h|0|0|0|10|10|15|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|35|10|0|0|0|15|0|10|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0.00|0|0|0|0|
|724|ClientSnapRealm.cc|src/client/ClientSnapRealm.cc|2|21|0|4|23|2|4|4|4|1|23|2|21|0|0|1|29|4|21|4|18|2|0|2|21|28|4|0|24|4|4|4|1|1|0.10|4|4|4|1|
|725|ClientSnapRealm.h|src/client/ClientSnapRealm.h|0|18|0|14|44|4|5|5|5|1|18|0|18|0|1|4|60|14|38|0|0|4|0|6|21|32|27|0|5|2|2|2|1|1|0.11|5|5|5|4|
|769|actions.hpp|src/rbd_replay/actions.hpp|0|105|0|83|212|49|34|34|34|1|105|0|105|0|15|34|344|83|203|0|0|49|0|9|77|205|181|0|24|1|1|1|1|0|0.24|34|34|34|34|

This is a another sample of ceph's extracted metadata for function granularity:

|Id|Name|FullName|FilePath|Parameters|AltCountLineBlank|AltCountLineCode|AltCountLineComment|CountInput|CountLine|CountLineBlank|CountLineCode|CountLineCodeDecl|CountLineCodeExe|CountLineComment|CountLineInactive|CountLinePreprocessor|CountOutput|CountPath|CountPathLog|CountSemicolon|CountStmt|CountStmtDecl|CountStmtEmpty|CountStmtExe|Cyclomatic|CyclomaticModified|CyclomaticStrict|Essential|Knots|MaxEssentialKnots|MaxNesting|MinEssentialKnots|RatioCommentToCode|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|15|get_ostream|ceph::logging::MutableEntry::get_ostream|src/log/Entry.h||0|3|0|7668|3|0|3|1|1|0|0|0|2|1|0|1|1|0|0|1|1|1|1|1|0|0|0|0|0.00|
|71|handle_fsmap|cephfs::mirror::ClusterWatcher::handle_fsmap|src/tools/cephfs_mirror/ClusterWatcher.cc|const int &|11|69|3|1|83|11|69|25|0|3|0|0|3|8|1|34|55|49|0|6|7|7|7|1|0|0|2|0|0.04|
|163|append|ceph::buffer::v15_2_0::list::append|src/common/buffer.cc|const ceph::buffer::v15_2_0::ptr &|0|4|0|110|4|0|4|1|1|0|0|0|1|1|0|1|1|0|0|1|1|1|1|1|0|0|0|0|0.00|
|177|clone_range|SloppyCRCMap::clone_range|src/common/SloppyCRCMap.cc|"uint64_t,uint64_t,uint64_t,const SloppyCRCMap &,std::ostream *"|0|43|1|10|44|0|43|8|33|1|0|0|10|63|2|21|31|5|0|26|11|11|11|1|2|0|4|0|0.02|

### Dependency Graph File
The `dep_graph.csv` file represents the static and historical dependencies between the entities found in `metadata.csv`.
This file is created of three columns which are `entity_id`, `dependencies`, `weights`.

Each row demonstrates the dependencies of an entity with the id of `entity_id` to a list of other entities (the `dependencies` column).
These static dependencies are extracted from Understand's database.
A file has a dependency to a second file if it includes/imports the second file.
A function has a dependency to a second function if it calls the second function.

It also contains the association weights for each dependency which can be found in the `weights` column.
The association weights are extracted using the git history and Apriori algorithm.
For each dependency, the association weight is either a single zero or four real numbers. 

A single zero means although Understand detected a static relation, but there is no historical dependency between these two entities.
In other words, among all analyzed commits, there is no commit in which these both enities have changed.

On the other hand, the four real numbers represent `support`, `forward_confidence`, `backward_confidence`, and `lift`.
These metrics are popular among the association rule mining algorithms.
Note that assuming A has a dependency to B, `forward_confidence` is the confidence for A give B (A|B) and `backward_confidence` is the confidence for B give A (B|A).
For details about these association metrics, visit [this link](https://www.kdnuggets.com/2016/04/association-rules-apriori-algorithm-tutorial.html).

Here's how the dependency graph file looks like:

|entity_id|dependencies|weights|
|---|---|---|
|933|[317, 620]|[[0.014, 0.33, 0.25, 6.03], [0.0092, 0.22, 0.17, 4.02]]|
|1013|[272]|[0]|
|21|[22]|[[0.005, 1.0, 0.5, 108.5]]|
|18298|[1887, 431]|[0, [0.0061, 0.22, 0.5, 18.22]]|

Commit message:

update documentations for java support

Readme.md, after:

# Code Feature Extraction

## Introduction

This project aims to extract and compute source-code-related features from a software repository. It analyzes the source code based on static and version control history aspects and creates a dependency graph containing the relationships between files/functions and their association weights. The ultimate goal of extracting these features is for sloving the  test case selection and prioritization problems.

## Instructions for Obtaining Understand Database
### Understand
Understand is a code analysis enterprise software which provides static dependencies available in a source code between files, functions, classes, etc. For more details on this software, visit [this link](https://scitools.com/features). In this project, we utilize Understand to create a static call graph as a base for other features. 

In this section, we explain how to obtain the Understand database, a file with `.und` format which is the output of Understand's analysis. Note that this project needs Understand's database for extracting features and won't work without it.

### Adding Understand Python Package/Library
Unlike typical projects, Understand doesn't provide its Python library in the well-known pip package installer, and you need to manually add the package to your Python environment. The instructions of adding the package are explained in [this link](https://scitools.com/support/python-api/).

### Creating Accurate Understand Databases
Before moving forward to creating an Understand project, it's worth to pay attention to some points. On [this page](https://scitools.com/support/creating-accurate-cc-projects/), it is explained how to create accurate C/C++ Understand projects including a couple of solutions. Due to the common use of cmake in C/C++ projects and its simplicity, we recommend to follow the cmake solution explained in [this link](https://scitools.com//support/cmake-and-understand/). Using the method would omit all unnessary scripts and files that are not considered. In a nutshell, cmake's `CMAKE_EXPORT_COMPILE_COMMANDS` attribute should be set to `ON` so that cmake generates the `compile_commands.json` file which improves Understand's accuracy significantly.

Additionally, for accurate Java projects, Understand mentions importing the complete classpaths used in your project. For more details visit [this page](https://scitools.com/support/creating-accurate-java-projects/).

### Creating Understand Database Using the GUI
The following instructions are for creating an Understand database using the `compile_commands.json` file generated by the cmake command in C/C++ projects. If this approach does not apply to your project, you can checkout Understand's official documents in [this link](https://scitools.com/support/) and find the best method for your project.

- Click on File -> New -> Project from the title bar.

- Add the root directory of your source code and click continue, like this:

![Add directory](docs/gui-wizard-1.png)

- Next, you can see the "Import Settings from Other Tools?" window which might include lots of options to select from (like the image below). If you have followed the last section, you can see the `compile_commands.json` among the options. Tap the Import button on the right side of this option.

![Import settings](docs/gui-wizard-2.png)

- In this step, you can set the path to save the database file after Understand's analysis. You can also view how many source files Understand has detected. Make sure you have checked the "Configure Advanced Settings" checkbox. Finally, click on Create Project.

![Summary](docs/gui-wizard-3.png)

- In the configuration window you can set all the available settings for your project before starting the code analysis. First, click on the CMake item on the left menu and double check the existence of `compile_commands.json`. Second, you need to add the rest of the source files, and for doing that, select the File item on the menu to view the added source files. Then click on the button showed in the following picture and add the root directory of your project's source code. Finally, click on Ok button and wait for the analysis to complete.

![Add Sources](docs/gui-wizard-4.png)

Note that creating an Understand database for Java projects similar to the above instructions, however, you don't need the compile_commands.json file for Java projects and adding the project's root directory is enough.

## Usage Instructions
### Arguments
After creating Understand's database, you're ready to run our script. The following table demonstrates available arguments to run the script:

Argument Name | Description | Required
--- | --- | ---
-h, --help | Shows the help message and exits. | No
-d, --db-path | Path to Understand's database with the .udb format. | Yes
-p, --project-path | Path to project's source code which is a git repository. | Yes
--language | The main programming language of the project. We currently support Java and C/C++ languages and this argument's value for these languages are "java" and "c" respectively. | Yes
-l, --level | Specifies the granularity of feature extraction. It can be one of the two "file" or "function" values. | Yes
-o, --ouput-dir | Specifies the directory to save resulting datasets. The directory would be created if it doesn't exist. | Yes
--branch | The git branch to analyze. The default value is "master". | No
--since | The start date of commits to analyze with the format of YYYY-MM-DD. Not providing this argument means to analyze all commits. | No

### Usage Examples
- This example analyzes ceph's nautilus branch in the file granularity level for only commits since 2020-04-16:
```
python main.py -p ../sample-projects/ceph -d ../sample-projects/ceph.udb -l file -o ./ceph-file --branch nautilus --since 2020-04-16
```
- This example analyzes ceph's master branch in the function granularity level for all available commits:
```
python main.py -p ../sample-projects/ceph -d ../sample-projects/ceph.udb -l function -o ./ceph-function
```

## Outputs
Currently, this project creates two .csv files as its final results which are `metadata.csv` and `dep_graph.csv`.

### Metadata File
The `metadata.csv` file represents the features available for each individual entity (file or function depending on the used granularity level).
In addition to the metrics provided by Understand's analysis, it includes id, unique name, and path columns. 
You can read the description of all Understand metrics in [this link](https://scitools.com/support/metrics_list).
Here's a sample of ceph's extracted metadata in the file granularity:

|Id|Name|FilePath|AltAvgLineBlank|AltAvgLineCode|AltAvgLineComment|AltCountLineBlank|AltCountLineCode|AltCountLineComment|AvgCyclomatic|AvgCyclomaticModified|AvgCyclomaticStrict|AvgEssential|AvgLine|AvgLineBlank|AvgLineCode|AvgLineComment|CountDeclClass|CountDeclFunction|CountLine|CountLineBlank|CountLineCode|CountLineCodeDecl|CountLineCodeExe|CountLineComment|CountLineInactive|CountLinePreprocessor|CountSemicolon|CountStmt|CountStmtDecl|CountStmtEmpty|CountStmtExe|MaxCyclomatic|MaxCyclomaticModified|MaxCyclomaticStrict|MaxEssential|MaxNesting|RatioCommentToCode|SumCyclomatic|SumCyclomaticModified|SumCyclomaticStrict|SumEssential|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|1|ClusterWatcher.cc|src/tools/cephfs_mirror/ClusterWatcher.cc|2|14|0|28|123|7|3|3|3|0|16|2|14|0|0|8|156|28|112|40|10|7|0|11|50|111|87|0|24|8|8|8|1|3|0.06|27|27|27|8|
|20|debug.h|src/common/debug.h|0|0|0|10|10|15|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|35|10|0|0|0|15|0|10|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0.00|0|0|0|0|
|724|ClientSnapRealm.cc|src/client/ClientSnapRealm.cc|2|21|0|4|23|2|4|4|4|1|23|2|21|0|0|1|29|4|21|4|18|2|0|2|21|28|4|0|24|4|4|4|1|1|0.10|4|4|4|1|
|725|ClientSnapRealm.h|src/client/ClientSnapRealm.h|0|18|0|14|44|4|5|5|5|1|18|0|18|0|1|4|60|14|38|0|0|4|0|6|21|32|27|0|5|2|2|2|1|1|0.11|5|5|5|4|
|769|actions.hpp|src/rbd_replay/actions.hpp|0|105|0|83|212|49|34|34|34|1|105|0|105|0|15|34|344|83|203|0|0|49|0|9|77|205|181|0|24|1|1|1|1|0|0.24|34|34|34|34|

This is a another sample of ceph's extracted metadata for function granularity:

|Id|Name|FullName|FilePath|Parameters|AltCountLineBlank|AltCountLineCode|AltCountLineComment|CountInput|CountLine|CountLineBlank|CountLineCode|CountLineCodeDecl|CountLineCodeExe|CountLineComment|CountLineInactive|CountLinePreprocessor|CountOutput|CountPath|CountPathLog|CountSemicolon|CountStmt|CountStmtDecl|CountStmtEmpty|CountStmtExe|Cyclomatic|CyclomaticModified|CyclomaticStrict|Essential|Knots|MaxEssentialKnots|MaxNesting|MinEssentialKnots|RatioCommentToCode|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|15|get_ostream|ceph::logging::MutableEntry::get_ostream|src/log/Entry.h||0|3|0|7668|3|0|3|1|1|0|0|0|2|1|0|1|1|0|0|1|1|1|1|1|0|0|0|0|0.00|
|71|handle_fsmap|cephfs::mirror::ClusterWatcher::handle_fsmap|src/tools/cephfs_mirror/ClusterWatcher.cc|const int &|11|69|3|1|83|11|69|25|0|3|0|0|3|8|1|34|55|49|0|6|7|7|7|1|0|0|2|0|0.04|
|163|append|ceph::buffer::v15_2_0::list::append|src/common/buffer.cc|const ceph::buffer::v15_2_0::ptr &|0|4|0|110|4|0|4|1|1|0|0|0|1|1|0|1|1|0|0|1|1|1|1|1|0|0|0|0|0.00|
|177|clone_range|SloppyCRCMap::clone_range|src/common/SloppyCRCMap.cc|"uint64_t,uint64_t,uint64_t,const SloppyCRCMap &,std::ostream *"|0|43|1|10|44|0|43|8|33|1|0|0|10|63|2|21|31|5|0|26|11|11|11|1|2|0|4|0|0.02|

### Dependency Graph File
The `dep_graph.csv` file represents the static and historical dependencies between the entities found in `metadata.csv`.
This file is created of three columns which are `entity_id`, `dependencies`, `weights`.

Each row demonstrates the dependencies of an entity with the id of `entity_id` to a list of other entities (the `dependencies` column).
These static dependencies are extracted from Understand's database.
A file has a dependency to a second file if it includes/imports the second file.
A function has a dependency to a second function if it calls the second function.

It also contains the association weights for each dependency which can be found in the `weights` column.
The association weights are extracted using the git history and Apriori algorithm.
For each dependency, the association weight is either a single zero or four real numbers. 

A single zero means although Understand detected a static relation, but there is no historical dependency between these two entities.
In other words, among all analyzed commits, there is no commit in which these both enities have changed.

On the other hand, the four real numbers represent `support`, `forward_confidence`, `backward_confidence`, and `lift`.
These metrics are popular among the association rule mining algorithms.
Note that assuming A has a dependency to B, `forward_confidence` is the confidence for A give B (A|B) and `backward_confidence` is the confidence for B give A (B|A).
For details about these association metrics, visit [this link](https://www.kdnuggets.com/2016/04/association-rules-apriori-algorithm-tutorial.html).

Here's how the dependency graph file looks like:

|entity_id|dependencies|weights|
|---|---|---|
|933|[317, 620]|[[0.014, 0.33, 0.25, 6.03], [0.0092, 0.22, 0.17, 4.02]]|
|1013|[272]|[0]|
|21|[22]|[[0.005, 1.0, 0.5, 108.5]]|
|18298|[1887, 431]|[0, [0.0061, 0.22, 0.5, 18.22]]|
